# First class

### Can you write code for a device NOT on an operating system?

Yes, like a calculator.

### Why WOULD you want to write an OS for a calculator?

- Multitasking.
- Any kind of windowing system or libraries you want to use that you don't want
  to have to recreate.
- A TV might have picture in picture, or download ads in the background (network
  requests won't interupt the users watching tv).
- OS will let you switch between processes
- Multitasking wasn't the first thing to motivate an OS, but OSes that came
  before were just routines for doing I/O.
- OS is needed to **coordinate processes**.

### Distributed systems

- OSes + networking. Separating software onto multiple machines.

## Mental model for how a machine works

- Clock is the "looping" mechanism
- Made of material like quartz chrystal that will oscillate at a predictable
  frequency when you apply current to it.
- If you have 4 GHz machine it can perform 4billion cycles per second.
- **the cycle has to be predictable**!

### is it possible for a CPU cycle to take longer than the advertised clock speed?

- Yes. For instance, if it's hot, your CPU will slow down within an expected
  range.
- Could some operations take longer than expected? Yes, but it happens in an
  expected range.
- Clock is an input to everything (**I don't quite understand this, yet**)
- CPU components NEED to have a predictable clock speed
- CPU RAM is SRAM that uses "flip flops"
- main memory ram (DDR?) uses a capacitor(component that stores a charge). The main RAM chip is designed to have a
  clock speed, as well.

## scratch.c

- `a.out` is a binary, compiled C file.
- diff architectures support different operation types (opcodes). So, the
  contents of `a.out` are different depending on the machine you're compiling
  on. Contents of `a.out`: the source code it was compiled from, the version of
  your compiler, the configuration of your compiler (e.g. flags you pass in),
  etc.
- Bit patterns for "add" will be different on different architectures.
- Assembly language is for humans so we don't have to remember the bit patterns.
  Easy for us to remember "ADD", not "011011".
- `file a.out`: Mach-O is executable file format. Elf is on Linux. They're
  formats the OS uses to package up the code from `a.out`.
- Fetch-decode-execute is from RAM, **not** the disk.
- Common library functions can be **dynamically** linked so they don't have to
  be added to every executable. So those libraries are stored in some part of
  memory so all programs can use them. `printf` is usually always available,
  part of the POSIX standard. Usually you can rely on the dynamically linked
  libraries being there. `.dll`, dynamically linked library!
- `man clang`, can see the options the c compiler can use.
- `cat a.out`, will be garbage but the binary isn't interpretable as ASCII.
  ASCII table has 007 be the bel that will ring
- `hexdump -C a.out | head`. e.g.: `cf` `c` is 4 bits and `f` is 4 bits. Each
  row is 16 bytes. Left hand column is the offset. Right hand is offset
  interpretation of the executable. `.` is not printable. `TEXT` is for code.
  `DATA` is for data.
- The `5` we're squaring needs to be stored somewhere.
- `lldb ./a.out`, using a `-g` flag will make a mapping to the C code. `lldb` is
  a debugger.
  here will show you assembly code.
- `objdump -d a.out`
- `edi` is a register. The first argument of a function on x86 goes in that
  register.
- `register read edi -f d` to format the hex in decimal.
- `eax` is a return register.
- General purpose registers are 64 bits. Can tell how many bytes by counting hex
  characters (2 characters per byte).
- Registers ARE NOT zeroed out at the beginning of a function, like just to
  invoke `main()` there are things that are put into the registers.
- in x86 the PC register is the Instructor Pointer, the `rip`.
- Debugger steps on **instruction** at a time, not one C statement at a time,
  but there is a flag to do that as well.
- the Linker adds code before `main`.
- Stack grows upwards to lower addresses
- one FDE cycle corresponds to one line of the dissassembly.
- Byte reading convention, little or bigendian. Basically reading the hex
  backward or forward.
- `memory read` is just showing you RAM.
- `rsp` stack pointer. you can see the actual RAM, which is a giant array, one
  big line. When it's displayed on the screen it's split into lines just to help
  us parse it. So each line on the screen's address should be 16 bytes away from
  each other.
- There is NO type information in a register. Just 64 bits. It depends on the
  instruction in the PC for how the register is interpreted by the CPU.
- If you try to access a place in memory that doesn't exist you'll get a
  segmentation fault.

## Action Items

- Do prework for each class
- Introduce yourself in Slack
- If in LI next time, set up the Zoom call in advance
- Visual bel, check it out
- Look up register names for x86?

## My leftover questions

- Why do CPU components NEED to have a predictable clock speed?
- Left hand column is offset? The offset isn't part of the file, it's just to
  help you to read the output visually.
